docs/source/visualization/architecture.rst, before:

=========================
Technical Architecture
=========================

This document outlines the architecture for the **Omniverse Kit Extension** (`whoimpg.biologger.subscriber`) that serves as the bridge between high-frequency biologger data and 3D rigged animal assets.

The core objective is to move data from a **ZeroMQ (ZMQ)** stream into the **USD Fabric** (runtime memory) at low latency, ensuring that the 3D model, sensor telemetry, and behavioral predictions remain in lockstep.

Architectural Overview
----------------------

The extension operates as an asynchronous background service within **Omniverse USD Composer**. It decouples the simulation/processing logic (running on a separate machine or process) from the rendering viewport.

**Data Flow:**

1.  **ZMQ Socket**: Listens for `PUB` packets containing Quaternions and Physics telemetry.
2.  **Logic Engine**: A non-blocking Python thread parses JSON packets.
3.  **Fabric Writer**: Injects pose data directly into the **USD Fabric** layer for sub-millisecond updates to the Prim (e.g., `/World/Animal`).

Implementation Details
----------------------

ZMQ Subscription
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To prevent UI "hitching," the subscriber runs in a separate background thread.

*   **Mechanism**: `ZMQ SUB` socket in dedicated thread.
*   **Port**: Configurable (Default: `5555`).
*   **Topic**: Subscribes to all topics (empty filter) for simplicity.

Dynamic Asset Loading
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The extension supports dynamic loading of different animal assets based on command-line arguments. This allows the same extension code to drive a Shark, Swordfish, or other marine animals without code changes.

*   **Base Scene**: `omniverse/assets/ocean_scene.usda` (Empty environment).
*   **Asset Injection**: The extension reads the `--/biologger/animal` argument and references the corresponding USD/GLB file into the stage at runtime.

**Supported Assets:**

*   `shark` -> `great_white_shark.glb`
*   `swordfish` -> `swordfish.usd`
*   `whaleshark` -> `whale_shark.usd`

Payload Structure
-----------------

The extension expects a ZMQ packet with the following structure:

.. code-block:: json

    {
      "timestamp": 1660358220.019,
      "rotation": {
        "euler_deg": [8.34, 35.24, -179.87],  // [Roll, Pitch, Heading] in degrees
        "order": "zyx"                         // Extrinsic rotation order
      },
      "physics": {
        "accel_dynamic": [-3.79, -3.84, -2.07],  // Body-frame acceleration [x, y, z]
        "vedba": 5.78,                           // Vectorial Dynamic Body Acceleration
        "odba": 9.70,                            // Overall Dynamic Body Acceleration
        "depth": 4.59,                           // Depth in meters
        "velocity": 0.0,                         // Speed (m/s)
        "vertical_velocity": 0.01,               // Vertical velocity (m/s)
        "pseudo_x": -0.062,                      // Dead-reckoned X position
        "pseudo_y": -0.0001                      // Dead-reckoned Y position
      }
    }

**Note on Rotation:**
Euler angles are expected in degrees with ZYX extrinsic order (standard aerospace convention). The extension converts to quaternions internally.

Deployment Considerations
-------------------------

Streaming (Virtual Ocean)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To support the "Virtual Ocean" use case, the extension is designed to be compatible with **Omniverse Kit Streaming**.

*   **Headless Operation**: The extension does not rely on local GUI windows for critical functionality.
*   **WebRTC Support**: UI overlays are rendered as part of the viewport stream.

Verification
------------

To validate the pipeline:

1.  Launch the Omniverse App with the extension enabled.
2.  Run the simulation with a configuration file:

    .. code-block:: bash

        python -m biologger_sim --config config/Swordfish-RED001_20220812_19A0564-causal.yaml

3.  **Success Metric**: The animal model in the viewport should move smoothly with slip angles <15° during straight swimming.

.. _slip-angle-validation:

Slip Angle Diagnostics
----------------------

The extension computes a **slip angle** metric to validate alignment between the animal's heading direction and its actual velocity vector. This is critical for confirming that coordinate system conversions are correct.

**Definition:**

.. math::

    \theta_{slip} = \arccos(\hat{v} \cdot \hat{h})

Where:

*   :math:`\hat{v}` = Normalized velocity vector (computed from consecutive position deltas)
*   :math:`\hat{h}` = Normalized heading vector (forward direction of the mesh in world space)

**Expected Values:**

*   **Swimming straight**: Slip angle < 15° (typically 5-10°)
*   **Turning maneuver**: Slip angle may spike to 30-45°
*   **Coordinate bug**: Slip angle consistently > 80° indicates a sign error or axis mismatch

**Implementation Details:**

The heading vector is computed by transforming the mesh's local forward direction ``(0, 0, -1)`` by the telemetry quaternion:

.. code-block:: python

    fwd = rot_quat.Transform(Gf.Vec3f(0, 0, -1))

This works because the USD xform op order ensures telemetry is applied in world space:

.. code-block:: text

    v_world = telemetry × spawn × v_local

Since ``spawn × (0, 1, 0) = (0, 0, -1)``, we have:

.. code-block:: text

    telemetry × spawn × (0, 1, 0) = telemetry × (0, 0, -1)

**Diagnostic Logging:**

The extension logs slip angle data to ``omniverse-logs/<session>/slip_log.csv`` with columns:

*   ``Timestamp``: Simulation time
*   ``SlipAngle``: Angle in degrees
*   ``Speed``: Movement distance between frames
*   ``Vx, Vy, Vz``: Normalized velocity vector components
*   ``Hx, Hy, Hz``: Normalized heading vector components
*   ``NED_Heading``: Raw NED compass heading (before negation)

Coordinate System Reference
---------------------------

The following table summarizes the coordinate conventions used throughout the system:

.. list-table:: Coordinate System Conventions
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 25 25 30

   * - System
     - Forward
     - Up
     - Heading Convention
   * - NED (Marine)
     - +X (North)
     - -Z (Up from Down)
     - Clockwise (0°=N, 90°=E)
   * - USD Y-Up
     - -Z
     - +Y
     - Counter-Clockwise (Right-Hand Rule)
   * - Shark GLB (Native)
     - +Y
     - +Z
     - N/A (requires spawn rotation)

**Conversion Summary:**

.. code-block:: text

    NED Heading → USD Heading:  h_usd = -h_ned
    NED Depth   → USD Y:        y_usd = -depth_ned
    NED X (North) → USD Z:      z_usd = -x_ned
    NED Y (East)  → USD X:      x_usd = y_ned

Commit message:

update docs for warp/cpu modes

docs/source/visualization/architecture.rst, after:

=========================
Technical Architecture
=========================

This document outlines the architecture for the **Omniverse Kit Extension** (`whoimpg.biologger.subscriber`) that serves as the bridge between high-frequency biologger data and 3D rigged animal assets.

The core objective is to move data from a **ZeroMQ (ZMQ)** stream into the **USD Fabric** (runtime memory) at low latency, ensuring that the 3D model, sensor telemetry, and behavioral predictions remain in lockstep.

Architectural Overview
----------------------

The extension operates as an asynchronous background service within **Omniverse USD Composer**. It decouples the simulation/processing logic (running on a separate machine or process) from the rendering viewport.

**Data Flow:**

1.  **ZMQ Socket**: Listens for ``PUB`` packets containing Quaternions and Physics telemetry.
2.  **Logic Engine**: A non-blocking Python thread parses JSON packets.
3.  **Backend Dispatcher**: Choose between ``cpu`` (standard Python) or ``warp`` (NVIDIA Warp) processing.
4.  **Warp Kernel (Optional)**: If enabled, NED-to-USD coordinate transforms and slip angles are computed on the GPU.
5.  **Fabric Writer**: Injects pose data directly into the **USD Fabric** layer for sub-millisecond updates to the Prim (e.g., ``/World/Animal``).

Implementation Details
----------------------

ZMQ Subscription
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To prevent UI "hitching," the subscriber runs in a separate background thread.

*   **Mechanism**: `ZMQ SUB` socket in dedicated thread.
*   **Port**: Configurable (Default: `5555`).
*   **Topic**: Subscribes to all topics (empty filter) for simplicity.

Dynamic Asset Loading
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The extension supports dynamic loading of different animal assets based on command-line arguments. This allows the same extension code to drive a Shark, Swordfish, or other marine animals without code changes.

*   **Base Scene**: `omniverse/assets/ocean_scene.usda` (Empty environment).
*   **Asset Injection**: The extension reads the `--/biologger/animal` argument and references the corresponding USD/GLB file into the stage at runtime.

**Supported Assets:**

*   `shark` -> `great_white_shark.glb`
*   `swordfish` -> `swordfish.usd`
*   `whaleshark` -> `whale_shark.usd`

Payload Structure
-----------------

The extension expects a ZMQ packet with the following structure:

.. code-block:: json

    {
      "timestamp": 1660358220.019,
      "rotation": {
        "euler_deg": [8.34, 35.24, -179.87],  // [Roll, Pitch, Heading] in degrees
        "order": "zyx"                         // Extrinsic rotation order
      },
      "physics": {
        "accel_dynamic": [-3.79, -3.84, -2.07],  // Body-frame acceleration [x, y, z]
        "vedba": 5.78,                           // Vectorial Dynamic Body Acceleration
        "odba": 9.70,                            // Overall Dynamic Body Acceleration
        "depth": 4.59,                           // Depth in meters
        "velocity": 0.0,                         // Speed (m/s)
        "vertical_velocity": 0.01,               // Vertical velocity (m/s)
        "pseudo_x": -0.062,                      // Dead-reckoned X position
        "pseudo_y": -0.0001                      // Dead-reckoned Y position
      }
    }

**Note on Rotation:**
Euler angles are expected in degrees with ZYX extrinsic order (standard aerospace convention). The extension converts to quaternions internally.

Deployment Considerations
-------------------------

Streaming (Virtual Ocean)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To support the "Virtual Ocean" use case, the extension is designed to be compatible with **Omniverse Kit Streaming**.

*   **Headless Operation**: The extension does not rely on local GUI windows for critical functionality.
*   **WebRTC Support**: UI overlays are rendered as part of the viewport stream.

Verification
------------

To validate the pipeline:

1.  Launch the Omniverse App with the extension enabled.
2.  Run the simulation with a configuration file:

    .. code-block:: bash

        python -m biologger_sim --config config/Swordfish-RED001_20220812_19A0564-causal.yaml

3.  **Success Metric**: The animal model in the viewport should move smoothly with slip angles <15° during straight swimming.

.. _slip-angle-validation:

Slip Angle Diagnostics
----------------------

The extension computes a **slip angle** metric to validate alignment between the animal's heading direction and its actual velocity vector. This is critical for confirming that coordinate system conversions are correct.

**Definition:**

.. math::

    \theta_{slip} = \arccos(\hat{v} \cdot \hat{h})

Where:

*   :math:`\hat{v}` = Normalized velocity vector (computed from consecutive position deltas)
*   :math:`\hat{h}` = Normalized heading vector (forward direction of the mesh in world space)

**Expected Values:**

*   **Swimming straight**: Slip angle < 15° (typically 5-10°)
*   **Turning maneuver**: Slip angle may spike to 30-45°
*   **Coordinate bug**: Slip angle consistently > 80° indicates a sign error or axis mismatch

**Implementation Details:**

The heading vector is computed by transforming the mesh's local forward direction ``(0, 0, -1)`` by the telemetry quaternion:

.. code-block:: python

    fwd = rot_quat.Transform(Gf.Vec3f(0, 0, -1))

This works because the USD xform op order ensures telemetry is applied in world space:

.. code-block:: text

    v_world = telemetry × spawn × v_local

Since ``spawn × (0, 1, 0) = (0, 0, -1)``, we have:

.. code-block:: text

    telemetry × spawn × (0, 1, 0) = telemetry × (0, 0, -1)

**Diagnostic Logging:**

The extension logs slip angle data to ``omniverse-logs/<session>/slip_log.csv`` with columns:

*   ``Timestamp``: Simulation time
*   ``SlipAngle``: Angle in degrees
*   ``Speed``: Movement distance between frames
*   ``Vx, Vy, Vz``: Normalized velocity vector components
*   ``Hx, Hy, Hz``: Normalized heading vector components
*   ``NED_Heading``: Raw NED compass heading (before negation)

GPU Acceleration (NVIDIA Warp)
------------------------------

To support high-performance scaling, heavy computational tasks are offloaded to the GPU using specialized Warp kernels.

**NED to USD Coordinate Transform**
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``transform_ned_to_usd_kernel`` performs vectorized re-projection:

.. code-block:: python

    @wp.kernel
    def transform_ned_to_usd_kernel(
        in_pos: wp.array(dtype=wp.vec3),
        in_quat: wp.array(dtype=wp.vec4),
        out_pos: wp.array(dtype=wp.vec3),
        out_quat: wp.array(dtype=wp.vec4),
        out_slip: wp.array(dtype=float)
    ):
        # Implementation of NED to USD Y-Up re-projection

This ensures that even with thousands of entities, coordinate conversion does not bottleneck the main application thread.

Coordinate System Reference
---------------------------

The following table summarizes the coordinate conventions used throughout the system:

.. list-table:: Coordinate System Conventions
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 25 25 30

   * - System
     - Forward
     - Up
     - Heading Convention
   * - NED (Marine)
     - +X (North)
     - -Z (Up from Down)
     - Clockwise (0°=N, 90°=E)
   * - USD Y-Up
     - -Z
     - +Y
     - Counter-Clockwise (Right-Hand Rule)
   * - Shark GLB (Native)
     - +Y
     - +Z
     - N/A (requires spawn rotation)

**Conversion Summary:**

.. code-block:: text

    NED Heading → USD Heading:  h_usd = -h_ned
    NED Depth   → USD Y:        y_usd = -depth_ned
    NED X (North) → USD Z:      z_usd = -x_ned
    NED Y (East)  → USD X:      x_usd = y_ned
