1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

Advancing the frontier of fish geolocation into the ocean’s

midwaters

Arostegui MC1* Afonso P2,3 Fauconnet L2 Fontes J2 Macena BCL2,3 Meyer C4 Morato T2

Braun CD1

1. Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA, USA

2. Institute of Marine Sciences – OKEANOS, University of the Azores, Horta, Portugal

3. Institute of Marine Research – IMAR, Horta, Portugal

4. Hawai‘i Institute of Marine Biology, University of Hawai‘i at M¯anoa, Kaneohe, HI, USA

* Correspondence author. Email: <martin.arostegui@whoi.edu>

ORCID

Arostegui MC: 0000-0002-9313-9487

Afonso P: 0000-0002-4618-2589

Macena BCL: 0000-0001-5010-8560

Morato T: 0000-0003-2393-4773

Fauconnet L: 0000-0002-2039-2465

Braun CD: 0000-0002-9317-9489

Abstract

Tracking large-scale movements of fishes in the ocean’s midwaters, below the euphotic zone and above

the seafloor, is extremely challenging. Archival satellite telemetry devices rely on light, sea surface tem-

perature, or bottom depth data to estimate location. Consequently, geolocation of fishes inhabiting the

twilight (mesopelagic: 200–1000 m) and midnight (bathypelagic: 1000–4000 m) zones has been restricted to

hypothesized movement routes, thereby precluding a baseline ecological understanding against which to assess

potential anthropogenic impacts. We assessed the viability of comparing depth-temperature profiles measured

by animal-borne satellite tags against those from 3D ocean-resolving models and incorporated known locations

from acoustic telemetry to enable a quantitative framework for deep-sea geolocation. Testing of alternative,

1

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

data-driven likelihood scenarios on a deep-water shark species assemblage with marked variation in modal

depth distributions confirmed that the methodological frontier of geolocation can be advanced into the twilight

and midnight zones. We identify key limitations in deep-water geolocation, and ways to overcome them,

identifying a viable path for robust location estimates that can help address the knowledge gap on fish move-

ment ecology in the deep sea. Our findings suggest that leveraging state-of-the-art geolocation approaches, in

combination with novel technologies, raises new opportunities for studying enigmatic deep-ocean ecosystems.

Key words: Centrophorus squamosus, Galeorhinus galeus, Hexanchus griseus, hidden Markov model,

HMMoce, PSAT

1

Introduction

Satellite telemetry has revolutionized the study of movement ecology in marine fishes and the application of

such knowledge to ocean policy (Hussey et al., 2015; Hays et al., 2019). Although vertical movements are

directly measured by animal-borne archival tags using pressure sensors, the horizontal trajectory and spatial

habitat use over the course of a tag deployment must be reconstructed via geolocation estimates. Historically,

movement models used in marine fish geolocation have relied on light and sea surface temperature (SST)

for pelagic species and bottom depth for demersal species (Gatti et al., 2021). However, tags deployed on

fishes occupying the ocean’s midwaters below the euphotic zone and above the seafloor rarely yield any of

these data types, creating a grand challenge in applying existing geolocation methods and data types. As

such, these limitations pose a formidable barrier to studying the movement ecology of diverse and enigmatic

deep-sea fish communities (Edwards et al., 2019).

The state-of-the-art in geolocation for deep-water species that yield none of the surface- or bottom-associated

data inputs is limited to largely hypothesized movement routes. These have, for example, been based on

comparison to patchily distributed Argo profiling floats (e.g., leafscale gulper shark, Rodríguez-Cabello

et al. 2016) or sparse pop-up positions generated by the timed, sequential release of multiple satellite tags

from a given individual (e.g., Greenland shark, Hussey et al. 2018). While no quantitative geolocation of

strictly deep-sea species has ever been conducted, substantial progress has been made in reconstructing the

movements of species whose tag deployments yield reduced amounts of traditional data sources used for

geolocation (e.g., light, SST). Migrations of species that switch between occupation of the near-surface and

midwaters from daily to seasonal scales are now better constrained via comparison of profiles of depth and

temperature (PDTs) against the vertical thermal structure of the water column (Luo et al., 2015; Braun

et al., 2018b). Yet, unlike SST, which is measured daily at a global scale via satellite imagery, the tag-based

2

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

depth-temperature profiles must be compared to climatological averages of temperature at depth that are

mismatched in temporal scale (e.g., seasonal; Skomal et al. 2009) or model-based daily estimates of the true

environment (e.g., 3D ocean-resolving models; Braun et al. 2018a). In addition to profile-based likelihood

approaches, geolocation estimates can be further refined via the inclusion of known locations, such as those

measured by an archival tag with GPS or acoustic capability, that act as anchor points throughout the

deployment (Nyegaard et al., 2023; Goossens et al., 2023). However, no one has solely leveraged PDTs from

below the epipelagic, or integrated them with known locations, in a quantitative geolocation framework to

assess the viability of these approaches for enabling tracking of meso- and bathypelagic fishes.

Given the current obstacles to tracking the movements of deep-sea species, there is a dearth of information

on the movement ecology of fishes that inhabit the twilight (mesopelagic: 200–1000 m) and midnight

(bathypelagic: 1000–4000 m) zones. This knowledge gap precludes informed decision-making with respect

to extractive industries, such as oceanic fishing (Queiroz et al., 2019) and deep-sea mining (Drazen et al.,

2020), meaningful environmental impact assessments mandated by international treaties, such as the BBNJ

Agreement (Mendenhall and Helm, 2024), and development of a baseline ecological understanding against

which to assess the effects of future environmental change (Levin et al., 2020; Amon et al., 2022). Thus,

improving geolocation methods is a key priority for improving the basic and applied science of the deep

sea. Here, we assess the viability of advancing the methodological frontier of geolocation into the ocean’s

midwaters.

2 Methods

2.1 Sampling

Three species of deep-water sharks (tope – Galeorhinus galeus, n = 5 individuals; bluntnose sixgill – Hexanchus

griseus, n = 2 individuals; leafscale gulper – Centrophorus squamosus, n = 1 individual) were outfitted with

pop-up satellite archival transmitting (PSAT) tags (MiniPAT, Wildlife Computers, Inc.) around Faial island

in the Azores, Portugal, mid-north Atlantic (38.58ºN, 28.56ºW) between May 2017 and September 2019. The

tope and bluntnose sixgill sharks were also outfitted with acoustic tags (V16-4H-69kHz or V16-6H-69kHz;

Innovasea Inc.) detectable within a network of 44 receivers (VR2W, VR2AR, VR2Tx, and VR4-UWM;

Innovasea Inc.) deployed on the shelf and slopes of Faial, Pico, and Corvo islands and neighbouring seamounts

(Fig. S1, see Afonso et al. 2022 for details on the initiation of the acoustic array). The tagged assemblage of

sharks exhibits marked variation in modal depth distributions in the Northeast Atlantic that represents a

spectrum from epi- to bathypelagic (Fig. 1); tope shark primarily occupy the epipelagic and upper mesopelagic

3

from 0–650 m, bluntnose sixgill shark the mesopelagic from 200–1000 m, and leafscale gulper the lower

mesopelagic and uppermost bathypelagic from 600–1300 m (Santos et al., 2020; Das et al., 2022; Fauconnet

et al., 2023). While the shallower distribution of tope shark may occasionally yield light and/or SST data

useful in geolocation (Schaber et al., 2022), bluntnose sixgill and leafscale gulper sharks reside below the

epipelagic and, therefore, collect no light or SST measurements.

PSAT tags record a time-series archive of depth, temperature, and light at 3-15 second resolution, depending

on tag model and deployment duration. Tags were programmed to transmit summarized time series of depth

and temperature at 2.5-min resolution for tope sharks and 5-min resolution for bluntnose sixgill and leafscale

gulper sharks. Most PSAT tags were programmed to also transmit daily PDTs, but two deployments did

not yield daily profiles. In those cases, transmitted depth-temperature time series were used to generate

comparable PDTs. All PSAT tags recorded relative light level data (not calibrated to absolute units of

irradiance) that were summarized into daily products for geolocation. Physically recovered PSAT tags from

bluntnose sixgill and tope sharks provided the full time-series archive of depth, temperature, and light at 3-

and 15-sec resolution, respectively (see Table 1).

2.2 3D Ocean-Resolving Models

Ocean-resolving models offer an avenue by which to generate two-dimensional, spatial likelihoods of a fish’s

potential position that are informed by profiles of depth and temperature (Luo et al., 2015; Braun et al.,

2018b). The HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model (HYCOM; Chassignet et al. 2007) and the Global Ocean

Physics Reanalysis (GLORYS; Lellouche et al. 2018) are global ocean reanalyses that combine models and

observations via data assimilation. These products are among the most accurate ocean reanalyses with

the least bias relative to the true environment (Castillo-Trujillo et al., 2023). Both models use statistical

techniques to assimilate satellite altimeter and SST observations, as well as in situ temperature and salinity

profiles from a number of ocean-observing platforms. HYCOM and GLORYS provide global-extent daily

outputs of temperature at 0.08o horizontal resolution over 40 and 50 standard depth levels, respectively. The

decreasing variability in environmental conditions from the surface to deep ocean is mirrored by a parallel

decrease in the number of standard depth levels in these models with increasing depth. Across the depth range

of the study species, HYCOM (GLORYS) contains 23 (26) depth levels from 0–200 m in the epipelagic, 6 (6)

depth levels > 200 and ≤ 600 m in the upper mesopelagic, 4 (3) depth levels > 600 and ≤ 1000 m in the lower

mesopelagic, and 2 (3) depth levels > 1000 and ≤ 1500 m in the uppermost bathypelagic. Thus, deep-sea

fishes with progressively deeper distributions have less potential depth-temperature levels against which to

inform positional likelihoods on a given day. The reduced vertical resolution of HYCOM and GLORYS in the

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

114

115

116

4

meso- and bathypelagic zones highlights the importance of testing alternative likelihoods based on PDTs.

2.3 Alternative Input Likelihoods

Given that 3D ocean-resolving models can exhibit biases and disparate representations of the simulated

environment (de Souza et al., 2021), we tested using HYCOM, GLORYS, and a combination of the two

ocean reanalyses to produce the PDT-based likelihoods that are inputs to the geolocation movement model.

Input likelihoods generated from PDTs may be determined by comparing tag-recorded depth-temperature

profiles against 3D ocean-resolving models with respect to either 1) predicted temperature values at specific

depth levels (Nielsen and Tribuzio, 2023) or 2) the ocean heat content integrated across depth levels (Luo

et al., 2015). The depth-temperature likelihood is generated by comparing the tag-measured and model-

estimated temperatures at each depth level within the vertical range traversed by the tagged fish on a

given day, from which the likelihood values at each depth level are multiplied together to calculate the

overall depth-temperature likelihood (Nielsen and Tribuzio, 2023). In contrast, the ocean heat content

likelihood is generated by comparing the thermal energy integrated between the depths of the minimum

and maximum tag-measured temperatures and corresponding depths of model-estimated temperatures (Luo

et al., 2015).Traditionally, only one of these two alternatives is used in a given geolocation (e.g., Malara

et al. 2024). However, given the deficiency of other data inputs, we constructed the two types of PDT-based

likelihoods (depth-temperature and ocean heat content) for both HYCOM and GLORYS, potentially resulting

in concordant and discordant areas of likelihood overlap and separation, respectively. Thus, this approach

encompasses the positional uncertainty generated from the depth-temperature and ocean heat content

likelihoods within a given 3D ocean-resolving model (as well across such models when using PDT-based

likelihoods from more than one ocean reanalysis). We compared resulting geolocation outputs from model

iterations that used all combinations of both depth-temperature and ocean heat content input likelihoods

from only HYCOM, only GLORYS, and both combined to assess their variability and performance. For the

HYCOM- and GLORYS-only scenarios, daily depth-temperature and ocean heat content likelihoods from

the corresponding ocean reanalysis (e.g., HYCOM depth-temperature and HYCOM ocean heat content)

were combined by summing and then normalizing the daily summed likelihoods to calculate a combined,

daily PDT-based likelihood (with values ranging from 0–1). For the joint HYCOM-GLORYS scenario, the

daily depth-temperature and ocean heat content likelihoods from both ocean reanalyses (i.e., HYCOM

depth-temperature, HYCOM ocean heat content, GLORYS depth-temperature, and GLORYS ocean heat

content) were combined using the same summation and normalization approach.

The generation of vertically extensive PDTs is enabled by the diel vertical migration of species that typically

117

118

119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

136

137

138

139

140

141

142

143

144

145

146

147

5

148

149

150

151

152

153

154

155

156

157

158

159

160

161

162

163

164

165

166

167

168

169

170

171

172

173

174

175

176

177

178

transition from deeper waters during the daytime to shallower waters during the nighttime (Braun et al.,

2018b). However, occasional contact with the seafloor during the deepest phase of the migration cycle

provides additional information that can be leveraged to further constrain positional likelihoods used in

geolocation. Depth data recorded by tags are typically used either for 1) pelagic fish in which the daily

maximum depth acts as a filter precluding the fish from occurring in waters of shallower bottom depth (e.g.,

Galuardi et al. 2010) or 2) demersal fish in which the daily mean or maximum depth identifies the bottom

depth contour the fish likely occupied (e.g., Pedersen et al. 2008; Nielsen et al. 2019). The former is a more

conservative treatment of depth data in the context of geolocation because it merely rules out impossible

locations (with a binary likelihood surface) whereas the latter specifically constrains the fish to locations

of the corresponding bottom depth (using a likelihood distribution). Certain deep-sea fishes, including the

three sharks studied here, at times exhibit a benthopelagic ecology that suggests the potential utility of a

mixture of these treatments in which days of the deployment with likely bottom association are constrained

to a depth contour range whereas those days with unclear bottom or open water association are maintained

solely as binary depth filters. Thus, we examined the depth-time series of each deployment for days with

potential bottom association and, in these cases, compared the outputs from the geolocation movement model

when using the input depth likelihood solely as a filter versus when also leveraging it as a bottom-contour

constraint.

2.4 Geolocation

We conducted geolocations of the shark PSAT dataset with HMMoce (Braun et al., 2018b), a gridded hidden

Markov model approach that compares diverse tag-based observations against grid-based representations

of the ocean environment to generate likelihoods of a tagged individual’s location at each time step of the

deployment (open access at: <https://github.com/camrinbraun/HMMoce>). At 24-hr intervals, we calculated

separate likelihoods for each shark’s location based on the aforementioned (a) depth-temperature and (b)

ocean heat content from HYCOM and GLORYS compared against tag-measured PDTs (Fig. 2a-e), as well as

(c) bathymetry calculated as a binary likelihood surface that excludes areas shallower than the tag-recorded

maximum daily depth (30-arcsecond resolution Global Topography SRTM30_PLUS dataset, Becker et al.

2009, Fig. 3a,b). When shark vertical movements permitted, we also calculated separate likelihoods for

bottom depth constrained as the (d) mean daytime depth ± 2 standard deviations and (e) maximum daily

depth ± 20% (Fig. 3a,c). The vertical movements of some individual tope sharks facilitated the inclusion of

two epipelagic likelihoods: (e) light-based latitude and longitude derived from a threshold-based algorithm

(Hill and Braun 2001; GPE2 software, Wildlife Computers Inc.), and (f) SST generated from comparing

6

tag-based SST values against the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 1/4o Daily

Optimum Interpolation SST (OISST) climate data record (Reynolds et al., 2007; Banzon et al., 2016). All

likelihood grids were resampled to match the resolution (0.08o) of the native HYCOM grid, after which all

PDT-based likelihoods (depth-temperature and ocean heat content from HYCOM and/or GLORYS) were

combined and normalized to yield a single PDT-based likelihood (Fig. 2f). This process is designed to prevent

over-representation of the single PDT data stream in the overall daily likelihood. The resulting individual

observation likelihoods (e.g., PDT and bathymetry) were combined into daily overall likelihoods via the

aforementioned summation and normalization approach, and then convolved with a diffusive movement kernel

that assumed a single behaviour state (see below). Parameter estimation of the behavior state movement

speed used bound-constrained optimization (Byrd et al., 1995). Please see Fig. 1 of Nielsen et al. (2019) for

a flow-chart visualizing the hidden Markov model process underlying geolocation and Braun et al. (2018b)

for additional methodological details of HMMoce.

In all model iterations of the various input likelihoods tested, species-specific parameter bounds for the

one-state movement kernel were chosen based on daily displacement rates (km/d) from previous telemetry

studies done elsewhere on conspecifics, congeners, or species of similar movement capability (tope – West and

Stevens 2001; Nosal et al. 2021; bluntnose sixgill – Andrews et al. 2007; Campana et al. 2015; leafscale gulper

– Yano and Tanaka 1986; Rodríguez-Cabello and Sánchez 2014; Rodríguez-Cabello et al. 2016). Within these

bounds, the model estimated the speed best matching the behaviour state. We chose the one-state model

because we expect that the relatively large scale of geolocation uncertainty inherent in these data from the

deep ocean should preclude the model from making meaningful estimates of multiple behavior states for

these enigmatic species, and, if allowed to estimate multiple behaviors, the results are not likely to reflect

true behavior states. Thus, we elected to parameterize the movement model with a single behavior state

to simplify the modeling and in an attempt to not over-specify behavior states for these poorly understood

species. In the event of non-convergence in any of the one-state model iterations of a given deployment, we

re-conducted the geolocation of all model iterations from that deployment with a two-state configuration that

allowed for behavior state switching between periods of slower "resident" and faster "migrant" movements.

The resulting daily posterior probability surfaces represent the posterior distribution of the "state" in Bayesian

analyses which, in our case, is location (and behavior in the two-state models) at a given time step. These

daily posteriors were summed for each fish to yield their time-integrated, spatial utilization distributions. For

a full description of the formulation of the hidden Markov models, please see Pedersen et al. (2011).

179

180

181

182

183

184

185

186

187

188

189

190

191

192

193

194

195

196

197

198

199

200

201

202

203

204

205

206

207

208

7

2.5 Validation

Geolocation performance was quantified for sharks outfitted with acoustic tags that were detected on ≥ 10

deployment days. The relative quality of geolocation outputs resulting from the different input likelihood

iterations was assessed by comparing the daily posterior probability values (ranging from 0–1) at the known

locations on the corresponding deployment days, with higher values representing greater geolocation model

performance.

Additionally, we reran the best-performing movement model for each of the acoustically detected sharks to

include these known locations and quantify the increased model certainty provided by these anchor points.

Deployment days with known locations consisted of likelihood surfaces restricted to a single grid cell (where

likelihood equals 1 – Nyegaard et al. 2023) given that the detection radius of acoustic receivers (∼ 300–800

meters, Hussey et al. 2017) is markedly less than the size of a single grid cell (0.08o x 0.08o) in our model. We

compared the daily uncertainty throughout each deployment for models with and without the acoustic known

locations by assessing model uncertainty on days with and without these anchor points. Daily uncertainty

was calculated as the mean of the longitudinal and latitudinal radii of the circles best representing the daily

95% posterior probability contours along these axes.

Lastly, the most probable track for each deployment (and likelihood iteration therein) was calculated with

the Viterbi algorithm, a global decoding solution that improves daily location estimates derived from the

posterior probability surfaces (Nielsen et al., 2023). This track derivation was also used for the selected

likelihood iterations, including all available known locations, to derive the best possible geolocation estimate

for each individual.

209

210

211

212

213

214

215

216

217

218

219

220

221

222

223

224

225

226

227

228

229

3 Results

3.1 Reporting Outcome

PSAT tags deployed on eight individual sharks transmitted data, four of which were physically recovered

(Table 1). Median deployment durations per species (relative to programmed pop-off) were 258 d for tope (of

an intended 270 d), 140 d for bluntnose sixgill (of an intended 270 d), and the one leafscale gulper shark was

at large for 54 d (of an intended 150 d) (Table 1). All tope and bluntnose sixgill shark deployments started

and ended within the central island group of the Azores, whereas the one leafscale gulper shark deployment

ended south of the Azores Plateau.

The tope, bluntnose sixgill, and leafscale gulper sharks almost exclusively occupied depths shallower than 600,

230

231

232

233

234

235

236

237

8

1100, and 1300 m, respectively, but largely occurred from 0–300, 200–900, and 700–1200 m, respectively (Fig.

1). The vertical habitat use of the three shark species represents a striking distributional gradient across

the three oceanic domains under study, from the epipelagic to upper mesopelagic habitat use in tope shark

(Fig. 1a), to the diel vertical migration almost exclusively within the mesopelagic of bluntnose sixgill shark

(Fig. 1b), and to the deep mesopelagic to uppermost bathypelagic habitat use of leafscale gulper shark (Fig.

1c). There was marked inter-individual variability among tope sharks in the proportion of deployment days

yielding light or SST data (Table 1); however, only two individuals had > 60% of days with light data and

only two had any days with SST data. Of the five tope sharks, three yielded nearly complete PDT coverage

while the other two yielded ≤ 32% due to incomplete data transmission. In contrast, all of the bluntnose

sixgill and the one leafscale gulper shark yielded no deployment days with light or SST data but ≥ 74% of

days with PDT data (Table 1). Across species, only one tope shark with poor data transmission yielded <

96% of days with depth data. Among the sharks outfitted with acoustic tags, four of the tope and both

bluntnose sixgill sharks were detected within the receiver network at least once (Table 1). These acoustic

detections exclusively occurred at 20 receivers deployed around Faial and Pico islands.

The detailed depth-time series data from the recovered tag of one bluntnose sixgill shark (ID: 132057)

revealed periods of likely bottom association that could be leveraged for testing a depth-based likelihood

with bottom-contour constraint on the corresponding days of the deployment (Fig. 3). For approximately

the first month post-release, this shark exhibited seemingly unrestricted vertical movements between ∼ 350

and 700 m during nighttime and daytime, respectively. For the subsequent three months of the deployment,

the shark consistently occupied ∼ 100 – 200 m depth at night but exhibited two distinct vertical movement

patterns during daytime. The daytime patterns suggest the shark continued vertical migrations to ∼ 700

m depth when seemingly unrestricted by the seafloor but also exhibited periods with a truncated depth

distribution around 400 m when the individual was seemingly restricted by the underlying bathymetry. Days

with these shallower daytime modal depths were characterized by vertically-truncated (e.g., depth-restricted)

movements suggestive of bottom association in the complex topography of the Azores, which is consistent

with active-tracking records of this species swimming along the bottom of a deep island escarpment (Carey

and Clark, 1995). Thus, these daytime depths that appear truncated by the seafloor were used to inform an

alternative depth-based likelihood that switched between a binary depth filter likelihood (71.3% of deployment

days) and a bottom-contour constraint likelihood (28.7% of deployment days), based on the presumed

switching among vertical movement patterns observed for this individual.

238

239

240

241

242

243

244

245

246

247

248

249

250

251

252

253

254

255

256

257

258

259

260

261

262

263

264

265

266

267

9

3.2 Alternative Input Likelihoods

The geolocation model converged in a one-state configuration for nearly all deployments and iterations therein

(Figs. 4,5,6,S2), with the only exceptions being the GLORYS-only and joint GLORYS-HYCOM PDT-based

likelihood iterations of one tope shark (ID: 61653). Re-running all iterations of this one deployment in a

two-state configuration resulted in convergence without exception, and these more complex versions were

used in all downstream analyses.

Comparison of geolocations without known locations that used the GLORYS-only, HYCOM-only, and joint

GLORYS-HYCOM PDT-based likelihoods revealed the resulting utilization distributions (UDs) to be largely

consistent within deployments on tope sharks (Figs. 5,S2) but more variable within those on leafscale gulper

(Fig. 4) and bluntnose sixgill sharks (Fig. 6). Within the deployment on the leafscale gulper shark, the

resulting UDs suggested occupation of the waters south of the Azores Plateau but varied with respect to the

different PDT-based likelihoods (Fig. 4). Relative to each other, the GLORYS- and HYCOM-only iterations

exhibited westward and eastward biases, respectively (Fig. 4a–b). The joint GLORYS-HYCOM likelihood

model (Fig. 4c) encompassed the combined uncertainty across these ocean reanalyses in the UD, suggesting

that the eastward- then westward-veering track is the more likely overall path. However, uncertainty in

the exact movement path remained high as evinced by the breadth of the core-use area of the UD. The

western portion of this core-use area exhibited high likelihood but was not included in the most probable

track estimate (Fig. 4c).

The UDs for three of the tope sharks (IDs: 61677, 61678, 181907) all suggested general fidelity to the area of

the Azores Plateau with minimal variation among results from the different PDT-based likelihood iterations

(Figs. 5e–g,S2a–c,i–k). In contrast, the UDs for the other two tope sharks (IDs: 61653, 61676) suggested a

mixture of fidelity to the Azores archipelago and southerly movement into the region around the Atlantis-Great

Meteor Seamount Chain (Figs. 5a–c,S2e–g). For both of these deployments, the HYCOM-only iteration

exhibited a slight southward bias relative to the GLORYS-only iteration, but the joint GLORYS-HYCOM

iteration suggested an intermediate pattern of spatial habitat use (Figs. 5a–c,S2e–g).

For the two bluntnose sixgill sharks, the UDs largely suggested fidelity to the Azores Plateau, but there

was marked within-individual variation in the supposed core-use areas (Fig. 6). Notably, relative spatial

bias among the different PDT-based likelihood iterations was deployment-specific, with the GLORYS-only

iteration exhibiting northward bias relative to the HYCOM-only iteration for one deployment (ID: 132057,

Fig. 6a–b) and the opposite for the other deployment (ID: 132058, Fig. 6f–g). In both of these bluntnose

sixgill shark deployments, the joint GLORYS-HYCOM likelihood iteration exhibited contraction of the

268

269

270

271

272

273

274

275

276

277

278

279

280

281

282

283

284

285

286

287

288

289

290

291

292

293

294

295

296

297

298

10

299

300

301

302

303

304

305

306

307

308

309

310

311

312

313

314

315

316

317

318

319

320

321

322

323

324

325

326

327

328

329

outermost bounds of the UDs and suggested more intermediate core-use areas relative to the GLORYS- and

HYCOM-only iterations (Fig. 6a–c,f–h). For the one bluntnose sixgill shark with apparent bottom association

(ID: 132057), using a depth-based likelihood that incorporated bottom-contour constraint on corresponding

days and only a bathymetric filter on the other days further refined the UD (Fig. 6d). When using the

joint GLORYS-HYCOM PDT-based likelihood in both iterations, the mixed depth-based likelihood iteration

(Fig. 6d) specifically exhibited contraction of the outermost bounds of the UD, and shifted the core-use area

northward, relative to the depth-based likelihood iteration consisting solely of a daily bathymetric filter (Fig.

6c).

3.3 Validation

Comparing posterior probability values at known locations across geolocations informed by different combi-

nations of PDT-based likelihoods revealed species- and deployment-specific patterns in performance (Fig.

7). Of the five sharks with sufficient acoustically-determined known locations for this validation exercise

(range: 11 – 114 deployment days with known locations), posterior probabilities from the tope sharks (n = 3)

were typically greater than those from the bluntnose sixgills (n = 2). Among tope sharks, one deployment’s

HYCOM-only geolocation indicated higher likelihood at known locations than its GLORYS-only counterpart

(ID: 61653) whereas the other two deployments exhibited comparable performance among the HYCOM- and

GLORYS-only alternatives (IDs: 61676, 61677). Similarly, among bluntnose sixgills, one deployment indicated

higher likelihood at known locations using GLORYS-only relative to HYCOM-only iterations (ID: 132057)

while the other deployment exhibited similar performance among these alternatives (ID: 132058). Across

all five shark deployments, the geolocation iteration leveraging the joint GLORYS-HYCOM PDT-based

likelihood demonstrated increased or similar posterior probabilities at known locations compared to the next

best-performing GLORYS- or HYCOM-only iteration (Fig. 7). For the one bluntnose sixgill shark deployment

with likely bottom association on certain days (ID: 132057), using the depth-based likelihood consisting of a

day-to-day mixture of a bathymetric filter and bottom-contour constraint (in a model also using the joint

GLORYS-HYCOM likelihood) did not further improve posterior performance at known locations relative

to the comparative geolocation with the same PDT-based likelihood and only a bathymetric likelihood

filter. Among the two mixed depth-based likelihood iterations with different inputs to the bottom-contour

constraint, the maximum daily depth demonstrated higher posterior probability at known locations relative

to the iteration that used the mean daytime depth but these alternative versions were largely comparable

(Fig. 7).

In the best-performing geolocation iteration for each deployment (informed by the joint GLORYS-HYCOM

11

PDT-based likelihood), incorporating known locations from acoustic detections substantially decreased

location uncertainty (Fig. 8). Greater decreases in uncertainty occurred in deployments with increasing

frequency of known, rather than estimated, locations (Fig. 8). In the three deployments with ≥ 40% of days

with known locations (IDs: 132057, 132058, 61677), median daily uncertainty decreased 1.27 – 2.33o across

days with known locations and 0.87 – 2.25o across days without known locations when comparing geolocations

inclusive of these anchor points versus those exclusive of them. In contrast, a deployment with < 20% of days

with known locations (ID: 61676) exhibited decreases in the median daily uncertainty of 1.89o across days

with known locations but only 0.49o across days without known locations. However, even in the sparsest

example, a deployment with a single known location on the third day (ID: 181907) exhibited decreases in

daily uncertainty > 0.08o – the grid cell resolution of the geolocation model – for the next 21 days (Fig.

8). Such reduction in the propagation of daily uncertainty on days without known locations was greatest

when the duration between days with known locations decreased. For example, during the deployment on

bluntnose sixgill shark 132058, daily uncertainty in the model iteration including acoustic detections peaked

at 1.26o during a 15-d period with no known locations but was always < 0.80o during all other periods with

no known locations, all of which were ≤ 6 d in duration (Fig. 8b). An exception to the pattern of known

locations largely reducing uncertainty across days without known locations is that of tope shark 61653, in

which a higher resident movement speed (but the same migrant movement speed) was estimated by the

two-state geolocation inclusive of anchor points versus that exclusive of them, which (all else being equal)

inherently increases daily uncertainty given the greater daily spatial diffusion potential. While the presence of

anchor points restricted to the early period in this deployment precluded their ability to reduce uncertainty

later across this > 600-d geolocation, median daily uncertainty decreased 0.32o across days without known

locations within the two weeks surrounding the known locations in this deployment (Fig. 8d).

Integrating known locations with the joint GLORYS-HYCOM PDT-based likelihoods (plus light-, SST-,

and/or the mixed depth-based likelihoods for corresponding deployments) enabled generation of the best

geolocations possible for the double-tagged sharks given the available satellite and acoustic telemetry data

sources. Among the tope sharks, two deployments (IDs: 61653, 181907) exhibited similar UDs (and presumed

ecological interpretation of movement) when including versus excluding known locations (Fig. 5c–d,S2c–d),

whereas the other two (IDs: 61677, 61676) exhibited UDs that were markedly more constrained and suggested

a greater degree of fidelity to the archipelago when including versus excluding known locations (Fig. 5g–

h,S2g–h). The two bluntnose sixgill shark geolocations incorporating known locations were consistent in

exhibiting high fidelity to the Azores, with potentially small-scale offshore movements away from and back to

the central island group, but exhibited markedly curtailed UDs relative to their corresponding iterations that

330

331

332

333

334

335

336

337

338

339

340

341

342

343

344

345

346

347

348

349

350

351

352

353

354

355

356

357

358

359

360

361

12

362

363

364

365

366

367

368

369

370

371

372

373

374

375

376

377

378

379

380

381

382

383

384

385

386

387

388

389

390

391

392

were uninformed by acoustic detections (Fig. 6d–e,i–k).

4 Discussion

Model convergence and validation exercises of a deep-dwelling shark assemblage confirmed the viability of

geolocation in the ocean’s midwaters, identifying a path forward to addressing the knowledge gap on deep-sea

movement ecology of fishes and other marine animals. This advance overcomes two decades of geolocation

studies being restricted to pelagic species primarily occupying the surface ocean or demersal ones largely

associating with the seafloor that provide the light, SST, or bottom depth likelihood inputs traditionally

used in reconstructing fish movement (reviewed in Gatti et al. 2021). While key limitations remain, including

accurate assessment of movement patterns at scales finer than the characteristic uncertainty of midwater

geolocation, they are surmountable via incorporation of known locations that aid in refining outputs and

resultant ecological interpretations.

Reconstructing movements of fish largely or exclusively occupying midwaters is made possible by the

widespread availability of data-assimilating 3D ocean reanalyses, albeit with caveats requiring careful

consideration when determining what constitutes appropriate use of these geolocation outputs given their

underlying uncertainty. As with light- and SST-based geolocation inputs (Teo et al., 2004), the posterior

uncertainty stemming from use of PDT-based likelihoods – often in excess of 2o – is appropriate for

reconstructing large-scale movements, such as across ocean basins, but not for addressing fine-scale research

questions. When spatial habitat use of fish occurs at smaller scales, such as that observed for the two

bluntnose sixgill sharks, UDs are likely only representative of regional fidelity in general as opposed to being

accurate about the exact core-use areas therein. For example, nearly all of the geolocation iterations without

known locations for these individuals suggested that they remained in the area of the Azores Plateau (which

is accurate) but disagreed on the core-use areas, all of which were displaced offshore (which is inaccurate)

from their true island-adjacent distribution (Fig. 6). This broad-scale accuracy but finer-scale inaccuracy

stems from the inherent uncertainty in using PDT-based likelihoods – based on climatologies or daily ocean

reanalysis outputs – as inputs for geolocation, highlighting the responsibility of the researcher to know the

extent to which the results can reliably be applied. Furthermore, in the case of midwater geolocation in

areas of complex topography, the change in accuracy across scales of ecological inference is due, at least in

part, to bias in 3D ocean reanalyses attributable to inadequate representation of nearshore physical processes

(Russo et al., 2022). This mismatch between the modelled and real environment can artificially reduce

likelihood values in nearshore areas, thereby biasing the geolocation towards more offshore waters (Nielsen

and Tribuzio, 2023). As seen in the validation of the bluntnose sixgill versus tope shark deployments (Fig.

13

7), this geolocation bias may be magnified for species living at greater depths where reduced environmental

variability increases the chance that the variance used in the PDT-based likelihood specification may fail to

include the real environment within the error bounds around the modelled environment.

The issue of variable geolocation accuracy across spatial scales is especially true when making inference from

specific estimated daily locations or tracks that are derived from much broader model posteriors and represent

only a single potential pathway the tagged individual may have taken. The leafscale gulper shark that moved

into the waters south of the Azores Plateau exemplifies well this consideration, as its large-scale spatial habitat

use is likely adequately represented by the UDs but the corresponding tracks do not necessarily represent

the exact path followed by this animal (Fig. 4). The onus is, therefore, on the researcher to determine

if the underlying uncertainty in the UD and/or derived track equate to the same downstream ecological

interpretation. This issue is not unique to geolocation in the twilight and midnight zones but ubiquitous

across all reconstructions of fish movement from archival tag data which, despite always being characterized

by inherent uncertainty, are often presented simply as most probable tracks without the associated UDs or

uncertainty. Here, we present both UDs and most probable tracks but focus on the analysis and interpretation

of UDs as they directly incorporate and quantify the associated uncertainty in spatial movements. These are

critical considerations because the scale of basic and applied science questions that may be addressed by

geolocation strictly depends on the resulting degree and treatment of uncertainty (Gatti et al., 2021).

To enable accurate ecological understanding at finer scales than those provided by PDT-based likelihoods

alone, other data sources must be incorporated. For species that occasionally encounter the seafloor, depth-

time series data offer a way to potentially leverage bottom-contour likelihood constraints on deployment

days with likely bottom association (Pedersen et al., 2008). While this can help refine UDs relative to only

using depth data as a binary bathymetric filter, it is not a panacea to overcoming nearshore bias due to its

spatially implicit nature. Notably, the presence of undersea features that are offshore but of the same depth

as the bottom contour of interest (e.g., seamounts versus continental shelves) can overlap with PDT-based

likelihoods and result in high likelihood areas within realistic movement distances but away from the true

(in this case, more nearshore) distribution of a fish (Fig. 3c). Thus, explicitly known locations during the

deployment period provide the best improvements to geolocation accuracy and performance. These known

locations not only effectively anchor the corresponding days of a deployment but also markedly curtail

uncertainty on temporally proximal days due to the reduced propagation of error through time (Fig. 8). The

predominant methods for simultaneously acquiring satellite telemetry and high-resolution positional data

include 1) using a single archival tag with built-in Argos and/or GPS capability or 2) a pair of tags in which

one is an archival tag and the other has Argos and/or GPS capability. However, these approaches require the

393

394

395

396

397

398

399

400

401

402

403

404

405

406

407

408

409

410

411

412

413

414

415

416

417

418

419

420

421

422

423

424

14

satellite-linked positioning tag to break the surface of the water, which can provide intermittent locations for

fish rarely interacting with the surface (Nyegaard et al., 2023) but is of no value to studying fully deep-water

species that always remain at depth. In this case, the double-tagging of fish with satellite and acoustic devices

(e.g., this study; Strøm et al. 2017) or a single device with dual archival and acoustic capability (Goossens

et al., 2023) enables known location incorporation, substantially improved geolocation accuracy, and finer

scales of ecological inquiry if the animal moves within the detection range of a receiver array. Replacing

biased nearshore likelihood surfaces that are based on depth-temperature profiles with accurate anchor points

helps overcome the limitations of an imperfectly modelled ocean. Yet, the fact that acoustic receivers are

typically restricted in distribution to nearshore areas or, at best, seamount summit areas (e.g., this study)

where they can more easily be maintained results in a lack of anchor points in the open ocean, where 3D

ocean reanalyses are less biased but positional uncertainty remains. The timed sequential release of satellite

tags from an individual can yield at-sea known locations to integrate with satellite tag data (Hussey et al.,

2018) but represents a substantial investment into each outfitted fish. In this case, each released tag yields

only a single known location but may provide geolocation benefits well beyond a single location and time

point, as shown here.

Given the present constraints in accurately resolving animal movements at depth, novel technologies and

approaches are likely a key piece of the puzzle going forward. Measurement of the Earth’s magnetic field by

certain archival tags can be used to generate an additional (or alternative) input likelihood for geolocation

that is not dependent on surface or bottom association of the animal (Klimley et al., 2017). However, at least

recent versions of geomagnetic-capable tags exhibit substantial variation in precision and accuracy that can

hinder reconstruction of spatial habitat use, meaning that further refinement of this technology is needed

but promising (Nielsen et al., 2020). Current acoustic tags emit high-frequency "pings" that are recorded by

nearby moored hydrophones, but these sounds attenuate quickly in seawater with detection ranges typically

< 800 m on compatible receivers (Hussey et al., 2017). Logistic and cost constraints on the size of acoustic

receiver arrays therefore become problematic when applied to the vast volumes of water through which

animals must be tracked in the open ocean. The rapid evolution of autonomous vehicles in ocean observing

provides a promising new avenue for moving beyond static arrays for acoustic tracking studies. Autonomous

vehicles can carry mobile receivers to and from target locations and can readily and dynamically adapt to

survey needs (Gaskell et al., 2023), although these are still limited by the physics of high-frequency sound

transmission in seawater. Novel tag technology that reverses the traditional acoustic telemetry paradigm by

leveraging long-range acoustic transmissions from a low-frequency sound-source network to animal-borne

hydrophone tags may prove the most disruptive innovation for tracking deep-sea fauna (Fischer et al., 2017;

425

426

427

428

429

430

431

432

433

434

435

436

437

438

439

440

441

442

443

444

445

446

447

448

449

450

451

452

453

454

455

456

15

457

458

459

460

461

462

463

464

465

466

467

468

469

470

471

472

473

474

475

476

477

478

479

480

481

482

483

484

485

486

487

Braun et al., 2019). Recent advances to miniaturize this acoustic technology for tracking ocean-observing

assets have demonstrated a detection range up to 60 km in early field trials (Rossby et al., 2017) with

theoretical ranges an order of magnitude higher (∼ 600 km). These accurate, long-range acoustic technologies

could be applied to deep-water animals for direct incorporation into existing, likelihood-based geolocation

frameworks, as described here.

The deep sea is one of the most poorly studied ecosystems on Earth (Martin et al., 2020), is expected to

experience disproportionate climate impacts (Brito-Morales et al., 2020; Ariza et al., 2022), and contains valu-

able resources that are of increasing interest for extraction (Folkersen et al., 2018). Accurately characterizing

the movement ecology of deep-sea species is important for understanding potential impacts and sustainable

management of ocean resources. For instance, best practices in single-species fisheries management rely on

leveraging diverse information sources, including tag-resolved movements, to identify the spatial boundaries

used in stock assessment (Cadrin et al., 2023). Furthermore, monitoring movement patterns is central to both

the correct design and efficacy evaluation of spatial management approaches including rotational closed areas

and marine protected area networks (Grüss et al., 2011). Dynamic fisheries management approaches similarly

require accurate estimates of animal movements to quantify encounter rates between fishing gear and both

target and bycatch species in space and time (Lewison et al., 2015). Yet, movement for many deep-sea species

remains poorly constrained. Leveraging state-of-the-art geolocation approaches, in combination with novel

technologies, raises new opportunities for studying enigmatic deep-ocean ecosystems.

5 Acknowledgements

The authors thank all the scientific staff and vessel crew members that assisted with tagging and acoustic

receiver maintenance in the Azores. MCA and CDB were supported by the WHOI President’s Innovation Fund.

This work received national funds through the FCT—Foundation for Science and Technology, I.P., under the

project UIDB/05634/2020 and through the Regional Government of the Azores through the initiative to sup-

port the Research Centres of the University of the Azores and through the project M1.1.A/REEQ.CIENTIFICO

UI&D/2021/010, the research project Islandshark PTDC/BIA-BMA/ 32204/2017; the research projects

EcoDiveAz ACORES 01-0145-FEDER-000059, AEROS-Az ACORES-01-0145-FEDER-000131, MEESO EU

H2020-LC-BG-03- 2018, NAUTILOS 101000825 H2020-BG-2018-2020 / H2020-BG-2020-1 and Mission At-

lantic H2020-LC-BG-08-2018-862428. This work contributes to the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research

and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 633680 (DiscardLess). This output reflects only the

authors’ views, and the European Union cannot be held responsible for any use that may be made of the

information contained therein. LF was supported by the projects DiscardLess (No 633680) and SOS TubaProf

16

(MAR-01.03.02-FEAMP-0040). JF was co-financed by the Fund 01-0145-FEDER-000140 “MarAZ Researchers:

Consolidate a body of researchers in Marine Sciences in the Azores” of the European Union and research

grant M3.1.a/F/062/2016 funded by Fundo Regional de Ciência e Tecnologia from Governo dos Açores. PA

was supported by the projects MISSION ATLANTIC [EC H2020 grant ID 862428], MEESO [EC H2020 grant

ID 817669] and the program MONICO (funded by the Azorean Regional Government), and by Program

Investigator from the FCT-IP – Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology, I.P. [IF 01640 2015 CP

1299 CT0001]. BCL was co-financed by the projects MISSION ATLANTIC, MEESO and AEROS-Az. TM

was supported by the FCT-IP Program Stimulus of Scientific Employment (CCCIND/03345/2020) and the

H2020 programme No 818123 (iAtlantic). We thank Les Gallagher (Fishpics® & IMAR-DOP, University of

the Azores) for use of the shark artwork in Figs. 1, 4–8, and S2.

6 Data Availability

The NOAA OISST data are available from the National Centers for Environmental Information (<https://www>.

ncei.noaa.gov/products/optimum-interpolation-sst). Ocean reanalysis depth-temperature data are available

from the HYCOM Consortium (<https://www.hycom.org/>) and Copernicus Marine Environment Monitoring

Service (<https://data.marine.copernicus.eu/product/GLOBAL_MULTIYEAR_PHY_001_030/description>).

Bathymetry data used in geolocation are available from the Satellite Geodesy research group at Scripps

Institution of Oceanography (<https://topex.ucsd.edu/index.html>). Bathymetry and shoreline data used in

figure generation are available from the NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (https:

//www.ncei.noaa.gov/products/etopo-global-relief-model) and Global Self-consistent, Hierarchical, High-

resolution Geography Database (<https://www.soest.hawaii.edu/pwessel/gshhg/>). The geolocation outputs

and raw telemetry data used in this study are available upon reasonable request to MCA and PA, respectively.

7 Conflict of Interest

The authors have no conflict to declare.

488

489

490

491

492

493

494

495

496

497

498

499

500

501

502

503

504

505

506

507

508

509

510

17

References

Afonso, P., Gandra, M., Graça, G., Macena, B., Vandeperre, F., and Fontes, J. (2022). The multi-annual

residency of juvenile smooth hammerhead shark in an oceanic island nursery. Frontiers in Marine Science,

9:844893.

Amon, D. J., Gollner, S., Morato, T., Smith, C. R., Chen, C., Christiansen, S., Currie, B., Drazen, J. C.,

Fukushima, T., Gianni, M., Gjerde, K. M., Gooday, A. J., Guillen Grillo, G., Haeckel, M., Joyini, T., Ju, S.,

Levin, L. A., Metaxas, A., Mianowicz, K., Molodtsova, T. N., Narberhaus, I., Orcutt, B. N., Swaddling, A.,

Tuhumwire, J., Urueña Palacio, P., Walker, M., Weaver, P., Xu, X., Yow Mulalap, C., Edwards, P. E. T.,

and Pickens, C. (2022). Assessment of scientific gaps related to the effective environmental management of

deep-seabed mining. Marine Policy, 138:105006.

Andrews, K. S., Levin, P. S., Katz, S. L., Farrer, D., Gallucci, V. F., and Bargmann, G. (2007). Acoustic

monitoring of sixgill shark movements in Puget Sound: Evidence for localized movement. Canadian Journal

of Zoology, 85(11):1136–1142.

Ariza, A., Lengaigne, M., Menkes, C., Lebourges-Dhaussy, A., Receveur, A., Gorgues, T., Habasque, J.,

Gutiérrez, M., Maury, O., and Bertrand, A. (2022). Global decline of pelagic fauna in a warmer ocean.

Nature Climate Change, 12:928–934.

Banzon, V., Smith, T. M., Chin, T. M., Liu, C., and Hankins, W. (2016). A long-term record of blended

satellite and in situ sea-surface temperature for climate monitoring, modeling and environmental studies.

Earth System Science Data, 8:165–176.

Becker, J. J., Sandwell, D. T., Smith, W. H. F., Braud, J., Binder, B., Depner, J., Fabre, D., Factor, J.,

Ingalls, S., and Kim, S. H. (2009). Global bathymetry and elevation data at 30 arc seconds resolution:

SRTM30_PLUS. Marine Geodesy, 32(4):355–371.

Braun, C., Skomal, G., and Thorrold, S. (2018a). Integrating Archival Tag Data and a High-Resolution

Oceanographic Model to Estimate Basking Shark (Cetorhinus maximus) Movements in the Western Atlantic.

Frontiers in Marine Science, 5:00025.

Braun, C. D., Fischer, G., Rossby, H. T., Furey, H., Bower, A., and Thorrold, S. R. (2019). The RAFOS

Ocean Acoustic Monitoring (ROAM) tag: a highly accurate fish tag for at-sea movement studies. North

Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission Technical Report No., 15:168–170.

Braun, C. D., Galuardi, B., and Thorrold, S. R. (2018b). HMMoce: An R package for improved geolocation

of archival-tagged fishes using a hidden Markov method. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, pages 1–9.

511

512

513

514

515

516

517

518

519

520

521

522

523

524

525

526

527

528

529

530

531

532

533

534

535

536

537

538

539

540

18

Brito-Morales, I., Schoeman, D. S., Molinos, J. G., Burrows, M. T., Klein, C. J., Arafeh-Dalmau, N.,

Kaschner, K., Garilao, C., Kesner-Reyes, K., and Richardson, A. J. (2020). Climate velocity reveals

increasing exposure of deep-ocean biodiversity to future warming. Nature Climate Change, 10(6):576–581.

Byrd, R. H., Lu, P., Nocedal, J., and Zhu, C. (1995). A limited memory algorithm for bound constrained

optimization. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 16:1190–1208.

Cadrin, S. X., Goethel, D. R., Berger, A., and Jardim, E. (2023). Best practices for defining spatial boundaries

and spatial structure in stock assessment. Fisheries Research, 262:106650.

Campana, S., Fisk, A. T., and Klimley, A. P. (2015). Movements of Arctic and northwest Atlantic Green-

land sharks (Somniosus microcephalus) monitored with archival satellite pop-up tags suggest long-range

migrations. Deep Sea Research Part II: Topical Studies in Oceanography, 115:109–115.

Carey, F. G. and Clark, E. (1995). Depth telemetry from the sixgill shark, Hexanchus griseus, at Bermuda.

Environmental Biology of Fishes, 42(1):7–14.

Castillo-Trujillo, A. C., Kwon, Y.-O., Fratantoni, P., Chen, K., Seo, H., Alexander, M. A., and Saba, V. S.

(2023). An evaluation of eight global ocean reanalyses for the Northeast U.S. Continental shelf. Progress in

Oceanography, 219:103126.

Chassignet, E., Hurlburt, H., Smedstad, O., Halliwell, G., Hogan, P., Wallcraft, A., Baraille, R., and Bleck,

R. (2007). The HYCOM (HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model) data assimilative system. Journal of Marine

Systems, 65:60–83.

Das, D., Gonzalez-Irusta, J. M., Morato, T., Fauconnet, L., Catarino, D., Afonso, P., Viegas, C., Rodrigues,

L., Menezes, G., Rosa, A., Pinho, M. R. R., da Silva, H. M., and Giacomello, E. (2022). Distribution

models of deep-sea elasmobranchs in the Azores, Mid-Atlantic Ridge, to inform spatial planning. Deep Sea

Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers, 182:103707.

de Souza, J., Couto, P., Soutelino, R., and Roughan, M. (2021). Evaluation of four global ocean reanalysis

products for New Zealand waters–a guide for regional ocean modelling. New Zealand Journal of Marine

and Freshwater Research, 55:132–155.

De Wysiecki, A. M. and Braccini, J. M. (2017). Shark length–length relationships: Studying morphology

allows the detection of bias in routine fisheries sampling. Regional Studies in Marine Science, 16:290–293.

Drazen, J. C., Smith, C. R., Gjerde, K. M., Haddock, S. H. D., Carter, G. S., Choy, C. A., Clark, M. R.,

Dutrieux, P., Goetze, E., Hauton, C., Hatta, M., Koslow, J. A., Leitner, A. B., Pacini, A., Perelman,

541

542

543

544

545

546

547

548

549

550

551

552

553

554

555

556

557

558

559

560

561

562

563

564

565

566

567

568

569

19

J. N., Peacock, T., Sutton, T. T., Watling, L., and Yamamoto, H. (2020). Midwater ecosystems must be

considered when evaluating environmental risks of deep-sea mining. Proceedings of the National Academy

of Sciences of the United States of America, 117:17455–17460.

Edwards, J. E., Pratt, J., Tress, N., and Hussey, N. E. (2019). Thinking deeper: Uncovering the mys-

teries of animal movement in the deep sea. Deep-Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers,

146(February):24–43.

Fauconnet, L., Catarino, D., Das, D., Giacomello, E., Gonzalez-Irusta, J. M., Afonso, P., and Morato, T.

(2023). Challenges in avoiding deep-water shark bycatch in Azorean hook-and-line fisheries. ICES Journal

of Marine Science, 80:605–619.

Fischer, G., Rossby, T., and Moonan, D. (2017). A miniature acoustic device for tracking small marine

animals or submerged drifters. Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology, 34:2601–2612.

Folkersen, M. V., Fleming, C. M., and Hasan, S. (2018). The economic value of the deep sea: a systematic

review and meta-analysis. Marine Policy, 94:71–80.

Galuardi, B., Royer, F., Golet, W., Logan, J., Neilson, J., and Lutcavage, M. (2010). Complex migration routes

of Atlantic bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus) question current population structure paradigm. Canadian

Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 67(6):966–976.

Gaskell, E. M., Funnell, T. R., Holbrook, C. M., Hondorp, D. W., and Tan, X. (2023). Characterization

of acoustic detection efficiency using an unmanned surface vessel as a mobile receiver platform. Animal

Biotelemetry, 11:41.

Gatti, P., Fisher, J., Cyr, F., Galbraith, P., Robert, D., and Le Bris, A. (2021). A review and tests of validation

and sensitivity of geolocation models for marine fish tracking. Fish and Fisheries, 22(5):1041–1066.

Goossens, J., Woillez, M., LeBris, A., Verhelst, P., Moens, T., Torreele, E., and Reubens, J. (2023). Acoustic

and archival technologies join forces: A combination tag. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 14(3):860–866.

Grüss, A., Kaplan, D. M., Guénette, S., Roberts, C. M., and Botsford, L. W. (2011). Consequences of adult

and juvenile movement for marine protected areas. Biological Conservation, 144:692–702.

Hays, G. C., Bailey, H., Bograd, S. J., Bowen, W. D., Campagna, C., Carmichael, R. H., Casale, P., Chiaradia,

A., Costa, D. P., Cuevas, E., Nico de Bruyn, P. J., Dias, M. P., Duarte, C. M., Dunn, D. C., Dutton, P. H.,

Esteban, N., Friedlaender, A., Goetz, K. T., Godley, B. J., Halpin, P. N., Hamann, M., Hammerschlag, N.,

Harcourt, R., Harrison, A.-L., Hazen, E. L., Heupel, M. R., Hoyt, E., Humphries, N. E., Kot, C. Y., Lea, J.

570

571

572

573

574

575

576

577

578

579

580

581

582

583

584

585

586

587

588

589

590

591

592

593

594

595

596

597

598

20

599

600

601

602

603

604

605

606

607

608

609

610

611

612

613

614

615

616

617

618

619

620

621

622

623

624

625

626

627

628

S. E., Marsh, H., Maxwell, S. M., McMahon, C. R., Notarbartolo di Sciara, G., Palacios, D. M., Phillips,

R. A., Righton, D., Schofield, G., Seminoff, J. A., Simpfendorfer, C. A., Sims, D. W., Takahashi, A., Tetley,

M. J., Thums, M., Trathan, P. N., Villegas-Amtmann, S., Wells, R. S., Whiting, S. D., Wildermann, N. E.,

and Sequeira, A. M. M. (2019). Translating Marine Animal Tracking Data into Conservation Policy and

Management. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 34(5):459–473.

Hill, R. D. and Braun, M. J. (2001). Geolocation by light level. In Electronic Tagging and Tracking in Marine

Fisheries: Proceedings of the Symposium on Tagging and Tracking Marine Fish with Electronic Devices,

pages 315–330. Springer, University of Hawai‘i.

Hussey, N. E., Hedges, K. J., Barkley, A. N., Treble, M. A., Peklova, I., Webber, D. M., Ferguson, S. H.,

Yurkowski, D. J., Kessel, S. T., Bedard, J. M., and Fisk, A. T. (2017). Movements of a deep-water fish:

establishing marine fisheries management boundaries in coastal Arctic waters. Ecological Applications,

27:687–704.

Hussey, N. E., Kessel, S., Aarestrup, K., Cooke, S., Cowley, P. D., Fisk, A. T., Harcourt, R. G., Holland,

K. N., Iverson, S., Kocik, J., Mills Flemming, J., and Whoriskey, F. (2015). Aquatic animal telemetry: a

panoramic window into the underwater world. Science, 348(6240):1255642.

Hussey, N. E., Orr, J., Fisk, A. T., Hedges, K., Ferguson, S., and Barkley, A. (2018). Mark report satellite tags

(mrPATs) to detail large-scale horizontal movements of deep water species: first results for the Greenland

shark (Somniosus microcephalus). Deep-Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers, 134:32–40.

Klimley, A. P., Flagg, M., Hammerschlag, N., and Hearn, A. (2017). The value of using measurements of

geomagnetic field in addition to irradiance and sea surface temperature to estimate geolocations of tagged

aquatic animals. Animal Biotelemetry, 5(1):19.

Lellouche, J.-M., Greiner, E., Le Galloudec, O., Garric, G., Regnier, C., Drevillon, M., Benkiran, M., Testut,

C.-E., Bourdalle-Badie, R., Gasparin, F., Hernandez, O., Levier, B., Drillet, Y., Remy, E., and Le Traon,

P.-Y. (2018). Recent updates to the Copernicus Marine Service global ocean monitoring and forecasting

real-time 1/12o high-resolution system. Ocean Science, 14(5):1093–1126.

Levin, L. A., Amon, D. J., and Lily, H. (2020). Challenges to the sustainability of deep-seabed mining. Nature

Sustainability, 3:784–794.

Lewison, R., Hobday, A. J., Maxwell, S., Hazen, E., Hartog, J. R., Dunn, D. C., Briscoe, D., Fossette, S.,

O’keefe, C. E., and Barnes, M. (2015). Dynamic ocean management: identifying the critical ingredients of

dynamic approaches to ocean resource management. BioScience, 65(5):486–498.

21

629

630

631

632

633

634

635

636

637

638

639

640

641

642

643

644

645

646

647

648

649

650

651

652

653

654

655

656

657

Luo, J., Ault, J. S., Shay, L. K., Hoolihan, J. P., Prince, E. D., Brown, C. A., and Rooker, J. R. (2015).

Ocean heat content reveals secrets of fish migrations. PLoS ONE, 10(10):e0141101.

Malara, D., Battaglia, P., Arostegui, M. C., Dale, J. J., Block, B. A., Braun, C. D., Brogna, M., Greco, S., and

Romeo, T. (2024). Satellite tagging insights into the seasonal movements and behavior of Mediterranean

spearfish (Tetrapturus belone, Istiophoridae) .

Martin, A., Boyd, P., Buesseler, K., Cetinic, I., Claustre, H., Giering, S., Henson, S., Irigoien, X., Kriest, I.,

Memery, L., Robinson, C., Saba, G., Sanders, R., Siegel, D., Villa-Alfageme, M., and Guidi, L. (2020). The

oceans’ twilight zone must be studied now, before it is too late. Nature, 580:26–28.

Mendenhall, E. and Helm, R. R. (2024). When the “best available science” is not good enough: The need

for supporting scientific research in the United Nations treaty to protect biodiversity beyond national

jurisdiction. Marine Policy, 161:105940.

Nielsen, J. K., Bryan, D. R., Rand, K. M., Arostegui, M. C., Braun, C. D., Galuardi, B., and McDermott,

S. F. (2023). Geolocation of a demersal fish (Pacific cod) in a high-latitude island chain (Aleutian Islands,

Alaska). Animal Biotelemetry, 11:29.

Nielsen, J. K., Mueter, F. J., Adkison, M. D., Loher, T., McDermott, S. F., and Seitz, A. C. (2019). Effect of

study area bathymetric heterogeneity on parameterization and performance of a depth-based geolocation

model for demersal fishes. Ecological Modelling, 402:18–34.

Nielsen, J. K., Mueter, F. J., Adkison, M. D., Loher, T., McDermott, S. F., and Seitz, A. C. (2020).

Potential utility of geomagnetic data for geolocation of demersal fishes in the North Pacific Ocean. Animal

Biotelemetry, 8(1):1–20.

Nielsen, J. K. and Tribuzio, C. (2023). Development and parameterization of a data likelihood model for

geolocation of a bentho-pelagic fish in the North Pacific Ocean. Ecological Modelling, 478:110282.

Nosal, A. P., Cartamil, D. P., Ammann, A. J., Bellquist, L. F., Ben-Aderet, N. J., Blincow, K. M., Burns,

E. S., Chapman, E. D., Freedman, R. M., Klimley, A. P., Logan, R. K., Lowe, C. G., Semmens, B. X.,

White, C. F., and Hastings, P. A. (2021). Triennial migration and philopatry in the critically endangered

soupfin shark Galeorhinus galeus. Journal of Applied Ecology, 58(8):1570–1582.

Nyegaard, M., Braun, C. D., Welly, M., Djohani, R., and Arostegui, M. C. (2023). Overcoming challenging

telemetry data of giant sunfish (Mola alexandrini, Molidae) in Bali, Indonesia. Marine Ecology Progress

Series, 722:157–175.

22

Pedersen, M. W., Patterson, T. A., Thygesen, U. H., and Madsen, H. (2011). Estimating animal behavior

and residency from movement data. Oikos, 120(9):1281–1290.

Pedersen, M. W., Righton, D., Thygesen, U. H., Andersen, K. H., and Madsen, H. (2008). Geolocation of

North Sea cod (Gadus morhua) using hidden Markov models and behavioral switching. Canadian Journal

of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 65:2367–2377.

Queiroz, N., Humphries, N. E., Couto, A., Vedor, M., da Costa, I., Sequeira, A. M. M., Mucientes, G., Santos,

A. M., Abascal, F. J., Abercrombie, D. L., Abrantes, K., Acuña-Marrero, D., Afonso, A. S., Afonso, P.,

Anders, D., Araujo, G., Arauz, R., Bach, P., Barnett, A., Bernal, D., Berumen, M. L., Bessudo Lion,

S., Bezerra, N. P. A., Blaison, A. V., Block, B. A., Bond, M. E., Bonfil, R., Bradford, R. W., Braun,

C. D., Brooks, E. J., Brooks, A., Brown, J., Bruce, B. D., Byrne, M. E., Campana, S. E., Carlisle, A. B.,

Chapman, D. D., Chapple, T. K., Chisholm, J., Clarke, C. R., Clua, E. G., Cochran, J. E. M., Crochelet,

E. C., Dagorn, L., Daly, R., Cortés, D. D., Doyle, T. K., Drew, M., Duffy, C. A. J., Erikson, T., Espinoza,

E., Ferreira, L. C., Ferretti, F., Filmalter, J. D., Fischer, G. C., Fitzpatrick, R., Fontes, J., Forget, F.,

Fowler, M., Francis, M. P., Gallagher, A. J., Gennari, E., Goldsworthy, S. D., Gollock, M. J., Green, J. R.,

Gustafson, J. A., Guttridge, T. L., Guzman, H. M., Hammerschlag, N., Harman, L., Hazin, F. H. V.,

Heard, M., Hearn, A. R., Holdsworth, J. C., Holmes, B. J., Howey, L. A., Hoyos, M., Hueter, R. E., Hussey,

N. E., Huveneers, C., Irion, D. T., Jacoby, D. M. P., Jewell, O. J. D., Johnson, R., Jordan, L. K. B.,

Jorgensen, S. J., Joyce, W., Keating Daly, C. A., Ketchum, J. T., Klimley, A. P., Kock, A. A., Koen, P.,

Ladino, F., Lana, F. O., Lea, J. S. E., Llewellyn, F., Lyon, W. S., MacDonnell, A., Macena, B. C. L.,

Marshall, H., McAllister, J. D., McAuley, R., Meÿer, M. A., Morris, J. J., Nelson, E. R., Papastamatiou,

Y. P., Patterson, T. A., Peñaherrera-Palma, C., Pepperell, J. G., Pierce, S. J., Poisson, F., Quintero, L. M.,

Richardson, A. J., Rogers, P. J., Rohner, C. A., Rowat, D. R. L., Samoilys, M., Semmens, J. M., Sheaves,

M., Shillinger, G., Shivji, M., Singh, S., Skomal, G. B., Smale, M. J., Snyders, L. B., Soler, G., Soria, M.,

Stehfest, K. M., Stevens, J. D., Thorrold, S. R., Tolotti, M. T., Towner, A., Travassos, P., Tyminski, J. P.,

Vandeperre, F., Vaudo, J. J., Watanabe, Y. Y., Weber, S. B., Wetherbee, B. M., White, T. D., Williams,

S., Zárate, P. M., Harcourt, R., Hays, G. C., Meekan, M. G., Thums, M., Irigoien, X., Eguiluz, V. M.,

Duarte, C. M., Sousa, L. L., Simpson, S. J., Southall, E. J., and Sims, D. W. (2019). Global spatial risk

assessment of sharks under the footprint of fisheries. Nature, 572(7770):461–466.

Reynolds, R. W., Smith, T. M., Liu, C., Chelton, D. B., Casey, K. S., and Schlax, M. G. (2007). Daily

high-resolution-blended analyses for sea surface temperature. Journal of Climate, 20:5473–5496.

Rodríguez-Cabello, C., González-Pola, C., and Sánchez, F. (2016). Migration and diving behavior of

658

659

660

661

662

663

664

665

666

667

668

669

670

671

672

673

674

675

676

677

678

679

680

681

682

683

684

685

686

687

688

23

689

690

691

692

693

694

695

696

697

698

699

700

701

702

703

704

705

706

707

708

709

710

711

712

713

714

715

716

Centrophorus squamosus in the NE Atlantic. Combining electronic tagging and Argo hydrography to infer

deep ocean trajectories. Deep-Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers, 115:48–62.

Rodríguez-Cabello, C. and Sánchez, F. (2014). Is Centrophorus squamosus a highly migratory deep-water

shark? Deep-Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers, 92:1–10.

Rossby, T., Fischer, G., and Omand, M. M. (2017). A new technology for continuous long-range tracking of

fish and lobster. Oceanography, 30:36–37.

Russo, C., Veitch, J., Carr, M., Fearon, G., and Whittle, C. (2022). An intercomparison of global reanalysis

products for Southern Africa’s major oceanographic features. Frontiers in Marine Science, 9:837906.

Santos, R., Novoa-Pabon, A., Silva, H., and Pinho, M. (2020). Elasmobranch species richness, fisheries,

abundance and size composition in the Azores archipelago (NE Atlantic). Marine Biology Research,

16(2):103–116.

Schaber, M., Gastauer, S., Cisewski, B., Hielscher, N., Janke, M., Peña, M., Sakinan, S., and Thorburn, J.

(2022). Extensive oceanic mesopelagic habitat use of a migratory continental shark species. Scientific

Reports, 12:2047.

Skomal, G., Zeeman, S., Chisholm, J., Summers, E., Walsh, H., McMahon, K., and Thorrold, S. (2009).

Transequatorial migrations by basking sharks in the western Atlantic Ocean. Current Biology, 19(12):P1019–

1022.

Strøm, J. F., Thorstad, E. B., Chafe, G., Sørbye, S. H., Righton, D., Rikardsen, A. H., and Carr, J. (2017).

Ocean migration of pop-up satellite archival tagged Atlantic salmon from the Miramichi River in Canada.

ICES Journal of Marine Science, 74(5):1356–1370.

Teo, S. L., Boustany, A. M., Blackwell, S. B., Walli, A., Weng, K. C., and Block, B. A. (2004). Validation

of geolocation estimates based on light level and sea surface temperature from electronic tags. Marine

Ecology Progress Series, 283:81–98.

West, G. J. and Stevens, J. D. (2001). Archival tagging of school shark, Galeorhinus galeus, in Australia:

Initial results. Environmental Biology of Fishes, 60(1-3):283–298.

Yano, K. and Tanaka, S. (1986). A telemetric study on movements of the deep sea squaloid shark, Centrophorus

acus. In Uyeno, T., Arai, R., Taniuchi, T., and Matsuura, K., editors, Proceedings of the Second International

Conference on Indo-Pacific Fishes, pages 372–380, Tokyo. Ichthyological Society of Japan.

24

Table 1: Summary of sharks outfitted with PSAT tags in the Azores, Portugal, that successfully collected
data (tope – G. galeus, bluntnose sixgill – H. griseus, leafscale gulper – C. squamosus). Tag Lat/Lon is the
latitude or longitude where the fish was tagged. Pop Lat/Lon is the latitude or longitude where the tag
popped off. TAL is time-at-liberty. Bathy (bathymetry), Light (light-based latitude and longitude), SST
(sea surface temperature), PDT (profile of depth and temperature), and Acoustic (receiver-detected known
locations) represent the percentage of deployment days with data for the corresponding input likelihood to
the movement model. An asterisk (*) in the Species column indicates that this tag was physically recovered.
Fork length was measured for all individuals except tope shark 61678, the total length measurement of which
was converted to fork length with a published length-length relationship (De Wysiecki and Braccini, 2017).

Species

ID

FL
(cm)

TAL
(d)

G. galeus*
G. galeus*
G. galeus*
G. galeus
G. galeus

61653 120
61676 109
99
61677
61678 131
181907 134

H. griseus*
H. griseus

132057 319
132058 410

633
272
258
124
245

129
151

Tag
Lat

38.6
38.6
38.6
38.6
38.6

38.6
38.6

Tag
Lon

-28.5
-28.5
-28.8
-28.7
-28.8

-28.5
-28.5

Pop
Lat

38.8
38.3
38.4
38.7
38.1

38.5
38.5

Pop
Lon

-27.0
-29.0
-28.3
-27.9
-27.6

-28.6
-28.2

Bathy
(%)

Light
(%)

SST
(%)

PDT
(%)

Acoustic
(%)

100.0
100.0
100.0
97.6
43.1

59.0
64.6
49.4
80.5
23.3

100.0
96.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
48.8
2.4

0.0
0.0

0.0

99.7
99.6
99.6
31.7
10.3

99.2
74.0

1.7
17.7
44.4
0.0
0.4

45.0
51.3

92.5

N/A

C. squamosus

44721

105

54

38.4

-28.4

40.5

-32.9

100.0

0.0

25

Figure 1: Mean daily time-at-depth exhibited by the three shark species during the day (white) and night
(black). Bin-specific values were averaged across days within each individual and then averaged across
individuals.

26

Figure 2: a) Example comparison of depth-temperature profiles (PDTs) among HYCOM, GLORYS, and an
animal-borne satellite tag at a known location. Hash marks indicate the depth levels at which temperature is
reported for the profiles from the 3D ocean models and the tag. The blue ribbon around the tag-based profile
represents the measured temperature range across the relevant depth levels. b,c) The depth-temperature
and d,e) ocean heat content likelihoods from HYCOM and GLORYS. f) The joint PDT-based likelihood
combining the individual likelihoods in panels b–e). The red point in panels b–f) marks the known location
where the shark was detected by an acoustic receiver on the corresponding day of the deployment. Data and
resulting likelihoods are from the same day of the deployment on tope shark 61653.

27

Figure 3: a) Example depth-time series showing days with and without putative bathymetric limitation to
vertical habitat use. b) The binary likelihood that excludes areas shallower than the tag-recorded maximum
daily depth and c) the bottom-contour constraint likelihood leveraging the mean daytime depth ± 2 standard
deviations. The red point in panels b) and c) marks the known location where the shark was detected by an
acoustic receiver on the corresponding day of the deployment. Data and resulting likelihoods are from the
asterisk-marked day in panel a) of the deployment on bluntnose sixgill shark 132057.

28

Figure 4: Utilization distributions and corresponding most probable tracks for the leafscale gulper shark
resulting from the use of a) only GLORYS, b) only HYCOM, or c) both GLORYS and HYCOM likelihoods
in generating the joint PDT-based likelihood used as an input to the geolocation model. Upward green and
downward red triangles indicate deployment start and end, respectively. Shark ID: 44721.

29

Figure 5: Example utilization distributions and corresponding most probable tracks for tope shark resulting
from the use of a,e) only GLORYS, b,f) only HYCOM, and c,g) both GLORYS and HYCOM in generating
the joint PDT-based likelihood used as an input to the geolocation model. Special-case outputs are those
resulting from the inclusion of d,h) known locations. Upward green and downward red triangles indicate
deployment start and end, respectively. Shark IDs: a–d) 61653, e–h) 61677.

30

Figure 6: Utilization distributions and corresponding most probable tracks for bluntnose sixgill shark
resulting from the use of a,f) only GLORYS, b,g) only HYCOM, and c,h) both GLORYS and HYCOM in
generating the joint PDT-based likelihood used as an input to the geolocation model. Special-case outputs
are those resulting from the inclusion of d) bottom-contour constraint into a mixed depth-based likelihood, e)
a mixed depth-based likelihood and known locations [k) zoomed-in output], and i) a standard depth-based
likelihood with known locations [j) zoomed-in output]; all three of these geolocation iterations relied on the
combined GLORYS-HYCOM PDT-based likelihood. Upward green and downward red triangles indicate
deployment start and end, respectively. Shark IDs: a–e,k) 132057, f–j) 132058.

31

Figure 7: Daily posterior values at known locations of acoustic detections from double-tagged sharks, in
each of the three PDT-based likelihood iterations (plus the joint GLORYS-HYCOM PDT-based likelihood
with a bottom-contour constraint, mixed depth-based likelihood, informed by the mean daytime or maximum
daily depth, for bluntnose sixgill 132057).

32

Figure 8: Comparison of daily uncertainty (derived from the 95% posterior probability contour) from
geolocation iterations inclusive versus exclusive of known locations for a–b) bluntnose sixgill sharks and c–f)
tope sharks. g) Change in daily uncertainty when going from the geolocation iteration exclusive of known
locations to the one inclusive of known locations. Deployment days are classified into those without versus
with known locations. All geolocation iterations herein used both GLORYS and HYCOM in generating the
joint PDT-based likelihood used as an input to the geolocation model.

33

Supplement – Advancing the frontier of fish geolocation

into the ocean’s midwaters

717

718

719

Supplementary Figures

Figure S1: Locations of the acoustic receivers (yellow points) in the study area.

34

Figure S2: Utilization distributions and corresponding most probable tracks for the remaining tope shark
resulting from the use of a,e,i) only GLORYS, b,f,j) only HYCOM, or c,g,k) both GLORYS and HYCOM
likelihoods in generating the joint PDT-based likelihood used as an input to the geolocation model. Special-
case outputs are those resulting from the inclusion of d,h) known locations. Upward green and downward red
triangles indicate deployment start and end, respectively. Shark IDs: a–d) 181907, e–h) 61676, i–k) 61678.

35
