docs/source/pipelines.rst, before:

=========================================
Pipeline Architecture: Lab vs Simulation
=========================================

The package provides **two distinct processing pipelines** designed for different stages of the research workflow.

Lab Mode (Post-Facto)
=====================

**High-Precision Analysis & Validation**

The Lab Mode pipeline is designed for batch analysis where the complete dataset is available. It aims for parity with the legacy R implementation.

Characteristics
---------------

- **Memory**: Full dataset loaded into memory.
- **Processing**: Acausal algorithms (e.g., `filtfilt`, centered moving averages).
- **Calibration**: Batch computation from the full dataset.
- **Depth**: Acausal interpolation of missing values.

Configuration
-------------

To enable Lab Mode, set the following in your YAML config:

.. code-block:: yaml

   pipeline:
     mode: "LAB"
     calibration:
       attachment_angle: "batch_compute"
       magnetometer: "batch_compute"
     depth:
       mode: "interpolate"

Simulation Mode (Real-Time)
===========================

**On-Tag Algorithm Development**

The Simulation Mode pipeline is designed for real-time processing where data arrives sample-by-sample. It uses fully causal algorithms with no lookahead.

Characteristics
---------------

- **Memory**: Fixed memory footprint (O(1)).
- **Processing**: Causal algorithms (e.g., `lfilter`, EMA).
- **Calibration**: Online adaptive calibration or fixed parameters.
- **Depth**: Real-time estimation (hold last value or predict).

Configuration
-------------

To enable Simulation Mode, set the following in your YAML config:

.. code-block:: yaml

   pipeline:
     mode: "SIMULATION"
     calibration:
       attachment_angle: "fixed"  # or "progressive" (future)
       magnetometer: "fixed"
     depth:
       mode: "realtime"

Commit message:

feat(hud): split attack angle/sideslip and configurable integration - Split Attack Angle (Alpha) and Sideslip (Beta) in HUD. - Made True Integration configurable per-entity in EntityConfig. - Fixed lint errors (unused variable, mypy type casting). - Updated user config to disable integration (restore R-parity).

docs/source/pipelines.rst, after:

=========================================
Pipeline Architecture: Lab vs Simulation
=========================================

The package provides **two distinct processing pipelines** designed for different stages of the research workflow.

Lab Mode (Post-Facto)
=====================

**High-Precision Analysis & Validation**

The Lab Mode pipeline is designed for batch analysis where the complete dataset is available. It aims for parity with the legacy R implementation.

Characteristics
---------------

- **Memory**: Full dataset loaded into memory.
- **Processing**: Acausal algorithms (e.g., `filtfilt`, centered moving averages).
- **Calibration**: Batch computation from the full dataset.
- **Depth**: Acausal interpolation of missing values.

Configuration
-------------

To enable Lab Mode, set the following in your YAML config:

.. code-block:: yaml

   pipeline:
     mode: "LAB"
     calibration:
       attachment_angle: "batch_compute"
       magnetometer: "batch_compute"
     depth:
       mode: "interpolate"
     true_integration: false  # Set to true to use real timestamps for track generation (physically accurate but differs from R)

Clock Drift & Jitter
--------------------
Real hardware sensors often have clock jitter (variable sampling rates).
Legacy R implementations use **Fixed Step Integration** (assuming ``dt = 1/freq``), which ignores this jitter. This produces smooth tracks but mathematically implies that the animal speeds up/slows down inversely to the clock jitter if analyzed against real time.

- **Default Behavior (R-Compatibility)**: Uses fixed ``dt``. Matches legacy R output exactly. Velocity calculated from position/time ratio will show jitter.
- **True Integration (``true_integration: true``)**: Uses actual time deltas (``real_dt``). Matches the physical path to the clock. Velocity is stable, but positions differ slightly from R legacy tracks.

**Diagnostic Output**:
Lab Mode now includes a ``ClockDrift`` column in the output, measuring the deviation between the sensor clock and an ideal clock:
``Drift = Timestamp_Actual - (Start_Time + Index * 1/Freq)``

Simulation Mode (Real-Time)
===========================

**On-Tag Algorithm Development**

The Simulation Mode pipeline is designed for real-time processing where data arrives sample-by-sample. It uses fully causal algorithms with no lookahead.

Characteristics
---------------

- **Memory**: Fixed memory footprint (O(1)).
- **Processing**: Causal algorithms (e.g., `lfilter`, EMA).
- **Calibration**: Online adaptive calibration or fixed parameters.
- **Depth**: Real-time estimation (hold last value or predict).

Configuration
-------------

To enable Simulation Mode, set the following in your YAML config:

.. code-block:: yaml

   pipeline:
     mode: "SIMULATION"
     calibration:
       attachment_angle: "fixed"  # or "progressive" (future)
       magnetometer: "fixed"
     depth:
       mode: "realtime"
